## IDS Reference Architecture Model (RAM)

Data sharing is essential for data-driven business ecosystems, as is the
need for data sovereignty. The IDS Reference Architecture Model
(IDS-RAM) defines fundamental concepts for sovereign data sharing. The
IDS-RAM focuses on the general concepts, functions, and processes
involved in creating a secure network of trusted data. It resides at a
higher abstraction level than common architecture models of concrete
software solutions. The document provides an overview supplemented by
dedicated architecture specifications that define the individual
components of the IDS.

The model consists of five layers: The business layer specifies the
different roles that the participants can assume, and it specifies the
main activities and interactions connected with each of these roles. The
functional layer defines the functional requirements of the IDS, plus
the concrete features to be derived from them. The process layer
specifies the interactions between the different components of the IDS.
It provides a dynamic view of the RAM. The information layer defines a
conceptual model that describes both the static and the dynamic aspects
of the IDS constituents using data linkage principles. The system layer
addresses the decomposition of the logical software components,
considering aspects such as integration, configuration, deployment, and
extensibility of these components.

Across all five layers, three perspectives need to be implemented:
security, certification, and governance. The security perspective
defines the common security measures for the IDS and the concepts for
data usage control. The certification perspective describes the IDS
Certification scheme as a foundation in the IDS. The governance
perspective describes the responsibilities of roles in the IDS.

The current version of the IDS-RAM that forms the basis for this
Rulebook is [V4](https://docs.internationaldataspaces.org/ids-ram-4/).
