# Functional requirements for a data space

This section of the Rulebook describes the mandatory functional
requirements as well as optional elements for building trusted data
spaces. It highlights the design decisions necessary to build and
operate data spaces in centralized, federated or decentralized
architectures and deployment patterns to show how various solutions are
enabled by the building blocks of data spaces.

Enterprises strive to have control over their data. Control is important
when managing data internally, but even more in sharing data with
others. The core function of a data space is to broker trust between
participants and to negotiate available data contracts. They enable
control over data sharing and create value for all involved parties.

A data space is both a multi-organizational agreement and a supporting
technical infrastructure for data sharing. Participants can have
pre-existing levels of trust: Some may have a prior relationship and
trust each other, while others might have no relationship and are
untrusted entities. Data spaces even make data sharing between direct
competitors possible. Data space connectors facilitate and orchestrate
the sharing of data assets, while enforcing requirements set by the data
provider. A connector includes policies, configuration and other
metadata artifacts that can run on any cloud infrastructure, on premises
or on an edge device.

Data sharing in a data space is not limited to sending data from one
participant to another but can be more complex. Fundamentally, all
sharing of data consists of peer-to-peer interactions. All scenarios of
multiple actors are built on peer-to-peer data contracts of two
participants. A data space adds value beyond individual data transfers
by enabling collective data services and applications. These additional
capabilities require certain functional requirements to be included in
the design of a data space.

Different business, regulatory, legal, or technical requirements
necessitate different architectures and approaches. Some data spaces
might require centralized components with centralized control, while
others might be designed so their participants have a maximum level of
autonomy and maintain agency over how to share their data.

> The functional requirements section refers to all involved roles as
> 'participant' in a data space. This underlines the need for all parties
> involved in a data space and in the exchange, sharing, and usage of data
> to adhere to a common set of rules, the policies provided by the data provider,
> the rights granted by a data rights holder, and given regulations.
> 
> An overview on roles in a data space is given in [section 2 on guiding principles](./2_Guiding_Principles.md#role-models).
