## Achieving digital sovereignty

Digital sovereignty starts with control over your identity.
Identification mechanisms are the basis for finding attributes of a
participant in a data space. Identity provides vital information to
enable the sharing of data -- everyone needs to understand who they are
sharing data with. It is the most important function within a data
space. It allows the participant to exert control, to choose which data
to share with whom, when and under what conditions. This ensures the
participant has agency over its assets.

How should the identities for participants be provided? A federated
system with a distributed design is a compromise between a centralized
and a decentralized design as it enables a higher level of control
without relying on a single central point of control. To enable a
federated system, services are implemented where multiple participants
share the responsibility for necessary functionality for all.

The data space governance authority (DSGA) is responsible for establishing the
policies and rules of the data space. This role can be carried out by
one entity, but also by multiple or even all participants. In a
centralized data space, this could be the operating company. In a
federated data space, this function would be performed by the
federator(s) agreeing on the rules, while in a fully decentralized data
space, various mechanisms are available to the participants. The
mechanisms in a decentralized data space enable participants to agree on
the set of policies and their enforcement, thus sharing responsibility
for the data space governance authority function.

When evaluating different data space architectures and deployment
models, the individual set of rules that serves as the basis is
important, regardless of the required services mentioned above. One such
rule set is the book of law for the membership. When a data space
operates in a regulated industry, there are laws and regulations for
data sharing. In this case, it makes sense to include specific
regulations in the data space policy and rule set. This provides clarity
when the data space crosses legal jurisdictions or industries.
