## 6.1 Regulatory framework

The lack of a general legal status (access regime) for data, partial
application of IP rights and trade secret protection and the
restrictions of personal data protection result in a fragmented and
incomplete regulatory framework. To address these shortcomings in data
sharing and reuse, the EU Commission presented the "[European strategy
for data](https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/policies/strategy-data)" in February 2020 describing the vision of a common European
data space. The Commission has proposed different regulations ([Digital Markets Act (DMA)](https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/en/TXT/?uri=COM%3A2020%3A842%3AFIN), [Digital Services Act (DSA)](https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A52020PC0825), [AI Act](https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=celex%3A52021PC0206) on
harmonised rules for data governance, data access and use as part of the
[EU's digital strategy](https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/policies/strategy-data).

Beside other regulations the [Data Governance Act (DGA)](https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A32022R0868)
entered into force on 23 June 2022 and will be applicable from September
2023 after a 15-months grace period. On 23 February 2022, the Commission
proposed a regulation on harmonised rules for fair access and use of
data, the [Data Act Proposal (DA-E)](https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=COM%3A2022%3A68%3AFIN).
With both acts the Commission aims to make more data available for use,
by setting up rules on who can use and access what data for which
purposes across all economic sectors in the EU.

The [DGA](https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/policies/data-governance-act-explained) aims to make more data available by regulating the reuse of
publicly/held, protected data, by promoting data sharing through the
regulation of novel data intermediaries and by encouraging the sharing
of data for altruistic purposes.
It aims to make public sector data more widely available for local
businesses, researchers and communities for the development of
innovative data-driven services. A specific focus is on the public
sector data which is subject to legal restrictions and thus out of the
scope of the Open Data Directive. Therefore, the proposal
covers public sector data which is legally protected on the grounds of:
(a) commercial confidentiality including the trade secrets; (b)
statistical confidentiality; (c) intellectual property rights of third
parties; (d) protection of personal data. This objective of providing
access to data that is not accessible as open data may be seen as
indicative of the emergence of a distinct regime for the data held by
public bodies. The public sector bodies enabling the use of such
protected data are required to be technically equipped to ensure that
data privacy and confidentiality are fully preserved. The proposal does
not interfere with the substantive rights on data as it refrains from
prescribing a right of access or reuse but lays out certain harmonized
rules and conditions guiding member states for establishing mechanisms
for the reuse of publicly held data.

The [DA-E](https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_22_1113) aims to ensure fairness in the digital environment, stimulate a
competitive data market, open opportunities for data-driven innovation
and make data more accessible for all by providing consumers and
businesses access to the data of their
devices.
The DA-E is regarded to be an essential building block of the European
data spaces. It is guided by the understanding that B2B contractual
agreements do not fully guarantee adequate access to data for SMEs or
start-ups. A contractual framework is needed, providing clarity on
rights and remedies regarding accessing, processing, sharing, and
storing of data in order to limit misuse. The proposal acknowledges the
importance of a harmonised data governance regime in achieving
competitiveness, innovation and sustainable growth in all sectors and
making the Union's transition to a green digital economy a success. The
proposal introduces interventions to the current legal landscape of B2B
data sharing and access in two dimensions: first, contracts as voluntary
agreements and second, statutory access rights or obligations to make
data available together with the general rules to be complied while
performing these obligations or exercising the rights.

Beside these specific Acts, further legal aspects to consider when
sharing data, including antitrust/competition, data protection and
security, copyright, patents/Intellectual property. The regulatory
development may have more impact on the concept and operationalization
of data spaces in the future and needs to be monitored to ensure
compliance.

The operationalisation of data governance and the establishment of data
spaces require a robust methodology both to navigate through the
existing regulatory patchwork (scattered in various legal instruments)
and to implement the upcoming legislative agenda of the EU*.* Providing
guidance to future-proof specific problems entails an assessment and
combination of various regulatory tools, contractual models, design
principles, and organizational structures. To this end, the below
***four-pillar data governance framework*** outlines a "legal anatomy"
of data governance consisting of the following:

1. the substantive rights and obligations related to data transactions
    (rights to data)
2. the contractual dimension
3. the organizational aspects
4. the technical implementation.

Beside the own responsibility of participants in a decentralized
organization, IDSA discusses and aligns on legal matters with other
initiatives. Coordination with other initiatives on the legal dimension
is all the more important as often (and by its nature) most legislation
needs to be translated into practical approaches and solutions - and a
common understanding of the legal terms is necessary to create a
trustworthy and reliable EU data sharing landscape.

Therefore, IDSA has established a legal framework task force to discuss
regulatory developments and legal topics as well as to organize the
collaboration and contribution of IDSA members regarding the legal
dimension.
