## IDS specifications on IDS-G

IDS-G provides specifications and further documentation from IDSA to the
public. While the RAM is technology independent, the specifications on
IDS-G describe the binding of the RAM to technological concepts and
focus on documentation and specifications for IDS based solutions.
IDS-G's main branch is stable and therefore the reliable foundation
for the development and maintenance of IDS-based solutions. It is
maintained under the umbrella of the IDSA technical steering committee.

Additionally, IDS-G provides access to the IDSA open source projects.
Currently, the following open source projects are available:

- IDS information model

More open source projects will be set up by the IDSA technical steering
committee in the future.

The specifications in IDS-G distinguish between four different aspects:

- **Components**: The framework for implementing IDS components as
    derived from the business layer in the RAM and described in the
    system layer, including the use of certain technologies and
    standards.

- **Communication**: The interaction and communication of the IDS
    components requires a clear specification to achieve
    interoperability. The communication section distinguishes between
    messages and message types and the interaction sequences between the
    components and related state machines to keep the interaction
    synchronized. Based on these two aspects bindings to technologies
    are derived.

- **Information model**: The IDS information model provides
    fundamental concepts to describe data products based on the IDS core
    concepts and fundamental standards DCAT for data assets and ODRL for
    contract policies.

- **Usage control**: Usage control is a fundamental mechanism in IDS.
    This section describes the usage contracts and how they can be
    realized in IDS Connectors.

The IDS-G specifications are available via [GitHub](https://github.com/International-Data-Spaces-Association/IDS-G).
