## 6.2 Legal Agreements & SITRA Rulebook

The analysis of the relevant legal frameworks pertaining to data
transactions reveals that there are many gaps and overlaps in the
current legal landscape mostly because, i) significant parts of the data
do not have a standard legal status as intangible assets, and ii) these
legal regimes do not address the needs of the data economy or the
specificities of data transactions.

As legislation only provides the general framework for data sharing, the
legal dimension of a data space includes a contractual framework so that
the different participants can agree on specified rules that fit their
data sharing context. In a decentralized organization where participants
are free to choose their contract partner and freely agree on contract
terms, the contractual framework means a suggested model of terms that
can be amended according to the needs (template approach).

Considering IDSA's focus on other dimensions and the importance of
alliance with other initiatives, IDSA takes an "adopting & consolidation
approach" to the contractual framework. Therefore, IDSA did not invent
an own set of legal agreements for IDS participants to be used instead
opting to suggest an already established contractual framework modified
regarding IDS specifics.

SITRA's rulebook for a fair data economy provides tools for networks
where organizations can share data and create services. The rulebook
model includes contractual templates and tools for building a data
sharing network. It sets out legal, business, technical, security, and
administrative rules as well as ethical guidelines to be observed by
organizations in data sharing networks. The rulebook model consists,
among other things, of contractual templates, a set of control questions
and a draft code of conduct that can be used to create a customized
rulebook for a data network. Sitra published the first version of the
rulebook for a fair data economy in 2020 and has updated it several
times since. The rulebook model is backed by Sitra's longterm work on
the fair data economy and a large group of experts from companies and
other organizations who have made valuable contributions to the rulebook
model.

The basic principles of the [Sitra rulebook](https://www.sitra.fi/en/publications/rulebook-for-a-fair-data-economy/) align well with the goals of
this IDSA Rulebook:

**Sovereignty**

IDS has made sovereignty of the data owner its most important design
principle. In the Rulebook data provider has sovereignty over its
data. The instrument for the data provider to exercise its sovereignty
is through the data terms of use, in which the data provider can
decide to whom it grants access and under what conditions it releases
the data for use by others in the data network.
**Trust**
Enabling trust is the first of the foundational IDS concepts. Trust is
encompassed in the Sitra Rulebook primarily through the balance
between the sovereign data providers and data users building new
business with the data. For instance, seizing the provision of data is
allowed, the termination period can be set to fit the needs of the
business or even initial fixed terms can be agreed upon. By default,
the data already distributed may still be used by the data user after
termination, but the provision of new data is seized. The balance is
also found in the clauses defining the boundary between data and
derived material in a way that it fits the context and needs of the
data provider and the data user. The Sitra rulebook also includes
clauses on auditing and extensive tools for ensuring that data
security and ethical principles are taken into account in the design
of data networks.

Considering the IDS dimensions, the SITRA templates are a valuable basis
to create the contract framework for data sharing based on IDS
principles and specifications. IDSA follows a "narrow" approach
regarding the suggested contract templates as the idea is to provide a
general framework that should be amended according to the specific
needs.
